\hypertarget{chapter-2-pointer-types-and-arrays}{%
\subsection{CHAPTER 2: Pointer types and
Arrays}\label{chapter-2-pointer-types-and-arrays}}

Okay, let's move on. Let us consider why we need to identify the
\emph{\textbf{type}} of variable that a pointer points to, as in:

\begin{minted}{c}
     int *ptr;
\end{minted}

One reason for doing this is so that later, once ptr "points to"
something, if we write:

\begin{minted}{c}
    *ptr = 2;
\end{minted}

the compiler will know how many bytes to copy into that memory location
pointed to by \textbf{ptr}. If \textbf{ptr} was declared as pointing to
an integer, 4 bytes would be copied. Similarly for floats and
doubles the appropriate number will be copied. But, defining the type
that the pointer points to permits a number of other interesting ways a
compiler can interpret code. For example, consider a block in memory
consisting if ten integers in a row. That is, 40 bytes of memory are set
aside to hold 10 integers.

Now, let's say we point our integer pointer \textbf{ptr} at the first of
these integers. Furthermore lets say that integer is located at memory
location 100 (decimal). What happens when we write:

\begin{minted}{c}
    ptr + 1;
 
\end{minted}

Because the compiler "knows" this is a pointer (i.e. its value is an
address) and that it points to an integer (its current address, 100, is
the address of an integer), it adds 4 to \textbf{ptr} instead of 1, so
the pointer "points to" the \textbf{next} \textbf{integer}, at memory
location 104. Similarly, were the \textbf{ptr} declared as a pointer to
a short, it would add 2 to it instead of 1. The same goes for other data
types such as floats, doubles, or even user defined data types such as
structures. This is obviously not the same kind of "addition" that we
normally think of. In C it is referred to as addition using "pointer
arithmetic", a term which we will come back to later.

Similarly, since \textbf{++ptr} and \textbf{ptr++} are both equivalent
to \textbf{ptr + 1} (though the point in the program when \textbf{ptr}
is incremented may be different), incrementing a pointer using the unary
++ operator, either pre- or post-, increments the address it stores by
the amount sizeof(type) where "type" is the type of the object pointed
to. (i.e. 4 for an integer).

Since a block of 10 integers located contiguously in memory is, by
definition, an array of integers, this brings up an interesting
relationship between arrays and pointers.

Consider the following:

\begin{minted}{c}
    int my_array[] = {1,23,17,4,-5,100}; 
\end{minted}

Here we have an array containing 6 integers. We refer to each of these
integers by means of a subscript to \textbf{my\_array}, i.e. using
\textbf{my\_array{[}0{]}} through \textbf{my\_array{[}5{]}}. But, we
could alternatively access them via a pointer as follows:

\begin{minted}{c}
    int *ptr;
    ptr = &my_array[0];       /* point our pointer at the first
                                 integer in our array */ 
\end{minted}

And then we could print out our array either using the array notation or
by dereferencing our pointer. The following code illustrates this:

-----------  Program 2.1  -----------------------------------
\inputminted[breaklines]{c}{../src/ch2-1.c}
--------- end program 2.1 -----------------------------------

Compile and run the above program and carefully note lines A and B and
that the program prints out the same values in either case. Also observe
how we dereferenced our pointer in line B, i.e. we first added i to it
and then dereferenced the new pointer. Change line B to read:

\begin{minted}{c}
    printf("ptr + %d = %d\n",i, *ptr++);
\end{minted}

and run it again... then change it to:

\begin{minted}{c}
    printf("ptr + %d = %d\n",i, *(++ptr));
\end{minted}

and try once more. Each time try and predict the outcome and carefully
look at the actual outcome.

In C, the standard states that wherever we might use
\textbf{\&var\_name{[}0{]}} we can replace that with \textbf{var\_name},
thus in our code where we wrote:

\begin{minted}{c}
    ptr = &my_array[0];
\end{minted}

we can write:

\begin{minted}{c}
    ptr = my_array;
\end{minted}

to achieve the same result.

This leads many texts to state that the name of an array is a pointer. I
prefer to mentally think "the name of the array is the address of first
element in the array". Many beginners (including myself when I was
learning) have a tendency to become confused by thinking of it as a
pointer. For example, while we can write

\begin{minted}{c}
    ptr = my_array;
\end{minted}

we cannot write

\begin{minted}{c}
    my_array = ptr;
\end{minted}

The reason is that while \textbf{ptr} is a variable, \textbf{my\_array}
is a constant. That is, the location at which the first element of
\textbf{my\_array} will be stored cannot be changed once
\textbf{my\_array{[}{]}} has been declared.

Earlier when discussing the term "lvalue" I cited K\&R-2 where it
stated:

\begin{quote}
"An \textbf{object} is a named region of storage; an \textbf{lvalue} is
an expression referring to an object".
\end{quote}

This raises an interesting problem. Since \textbf{my\_array} is a named
region of storage, why is \textbf{my\_array} in the above assignment
statement not an lvalue? To resolve this problem, some refer to
\textbf{my\_array} as an "unmodifiable lvalue".

Modify the example program above by changing

\begin{minted}{c}
    ptr = &my_array[0];
\end{minted}

to

\begin{minted}{c}
    ptr = my_array;
\end{minted}

and run it again to verify the results are identical.

Now, let's delve a little further into the difference between the names
\textbf{ptr} and \textbf{my\_array} as used above. Some writers will
refer to an array's name as a \emph{\textbf{constant}} pointer. What do
we mean by that? Well, to understand the term "constant" in this sense,
let's go back to our definition of the term "variable". When we declare
a variable we set aside a spot in memory to hold the value of the
appropriate type. Once that is done the name of the variable can be
interpreted in one of two ways. When used on the left side of the
assignment operator, the compiler interprets it as the memory location
to which to move that value resulting from evaluation of the right side
of the assignment operator. But, when used on the right side of the
assignment operator, the name of a variable is interpreted to mean the
contents stored at that memory address set aside to hold the value of
that variable.

With that in mind, let's now consider the simplest of constants, as in:

\begin{minted}{c}
    int i, k;
    i = 2;
\end{minted}

Here, while \textbf{i} is a variable and then occupies space in the data
portion of memory, \textbf{2} is a constant and, as such, instead of
setting aside memory in the data segment, it is imbedded directly in the
code segment of memory. That is, while writing something like \textbf{k
= i;} tells the compiler to create code which at run time will look at
memory location \textbf{\&i} to determine the value to be moved to
\textbf{k}, code created by \textbf{i = 2;} simply puts the \textbf{2}
in the code and there is no referencing of the data segment. That is,
both \textbf{k} and \textbf{i} are objects, but \textbf{2} is not an
object.

Similarly, in the above, since \textbf{my\_array} is a constant, once
the compiler establishes where the array itself is to be stored, it
"knows" the address of \textbf{my\_array{[}0{]}} and on seeing:

\begin{minted}{c}
    ptr = my_array;
\end{minted}

it simply uses this address as a constant in the code segment and there
is no referencing of the data segment beyond that.

This might be a good place explain further the use of the \textbf{(void
*)} expression used in Program 1.1 of Chapter 1. As we have seen we can
have pointers of various types. So far we have discussed pointers to
integers and pointers to characters. In coming chapters we will be
learning about pointers to structures and even pointer to pointers.

Also we have learned that on different systems the size of a pointer can
vary. As it turns out it is also possible that the size of a pointer can
vary depending on the data type of the object to which it points. Thus,
as with integers where you can run into trouble attempting to assign a
long integer to a variable of type short integer, you can run into
trouble attempting to assign the values of pointers of various types to
pointer variables of other types.

To minimize this problem, C provides for a pointer of type void. We can
declare such a pointer by writing:

\begin{minted}{c}
void *vptr;
\end{minted}

A void pointer is sort of a generic pointer. For example, while C will
not permit the comparison of a pointer to type integer with a pointer to
type character, for example, either of these can be compared to a void
pointer. Of course, as with other variables, casts can be used to
convert from one type of pointer to another under the proper
circumstances. In Program 1.1. of Chapter 1 I cast the pointers to
integers into void pointers to make them compatible with the \%p
conversion specification. In later chapters other casts will be made for
reasons defined therein.

Well, that's a lot of technical stuff to digest and I don't expect a
beginner to understand all of it on first reading. With time and
experimentation you will want to come back and re-read the first 2
chapters. But for now, let's move on to the relationship between
pointers, character arrays, and strings.

\begin{comment}
\href{ch3x.htm}{Chapter 3: Pointers and Strings}

\href{pointers.htm}{Back to Table of Contents}
\end{comment}
